feat: add OpenLineage EventListener plugin (#21265)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/admin/event-listeners-openlineage.md

openlineage-event-listener.facets-query-context-enabled=true
openlineage-event-listener.facets-query-statistics-enabled=true
openlineage-event-listener.include-query-types=DELETE,INSERT,MERGE,UPDATE,ALTER_TABLE_EXECUTE
```

And set add `etc/openlineage-event-listener.properties` to `event-listener.config-files`
in {ref}`config-properties`:

```properties
event-listener.config-files=etc/openlineage-event-listener.properties,...
```

### Configuration properties

:::{list-table}
:widths: 40, 40, 20
:header-rows: 1

* - Property name
  - Description
  - Default

* - openlineage-event-listener.connect-sink
  - Type of sink to which emit lineage information. Currently only API is supported.
  - `API`

* - openlineage-event-listener.connect-url
  - The URI that the plugin will POST events to. Needs to be OpenLineage compatible API with /api/v1/lineage endpoint present.
  - None. See the [requirements](openlineage-event-listener-requirements) section.

* - openlineage-event-listener.connect-api-key
  - Api Key used to authenticate within `openlineage-event-listener.connect-url` API.
  - None.

* - openlineage-event-listener.connect-retry-count

>   - The number of retries on server error. A server is considered to be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The number of retries on server error. A server is considered
```

>     in an error state when the response code is 500 or higher

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    in an error state when the response code is 500 or higher.
```

  - `3`

* - openlineage-event-listener.connect-retry-delay

>   - Duration for which to delay between attempts to send a request

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [Duration](prop-type-duration) between attempts to send a request.
```

  - `1s`

* - openlineage-event-listener.connect-backoff-base
  - The base used for exponential backoff when retrying on server error.
    The formula used to calculate the delay is
    `attemptDelay = retryDelay * backoffBase^{attemptCount}`.
    Attempt count starts from 0. Leave this empty or set to 1 to disable

>     exponential backoff and keep constant delays

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    exponential backoff and keep constant delays.
```

  - `2`

* - openlineage-event-listener.connect-max-delay

>   - The upper bound of a delay between 2 retries. This should be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The upper bound of a delay between two retries. This should be
```

    used with exponential backoff.
  - `1m`

* - openlineage-event-listener.trino-host

>   - Trino hostname. Will be used to render Job Namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Trino hostname. Used to render Job Namespace in OpenLineage.
```

>   - `localhost`

Reviewer: I think it should NOT have a default value. And certainly not the generic term `localhost`.

* - openlineage-event-listener.trino-port

>   - Trino port. Will be used to render Job Namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Trino port. Used to render Job Namespace in OpenLineage.
```

  - `8080`

* - openlineage-event-listener.facets-metadata-enabled

>   - Should Trino Metadata facet be included into run facet.

Reviewer: explain more what info that is or link to info elsewhere

  - `true`

* - openlineage-event-listener.facets-query-context-enabled

>   - Should Query Context facet be included into run facet.

Reviewer: explain more what info that is or link to info elsewhere

  - `true`

* - openlineage-event-listener.facets-query-statistics-enabled

>   - Should Query Statistics facet be included into run facet.

Reviewer: explain more what info that is or link to info elsewhere

  - `true`

* - openlineage-event-listener.include-query-types

>   - Which types of queries should be taken into account when emitting lineage information. List of values split by comma. Each value must be matching `io.trino.spi.resourcegroups.QueryType` enum. Query types not included here will be filtered out. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Which types of queries should be taken into account when emitting lineage information. List of values split by comma. Each value must be matching `io.trino.spi.resourcegroups.QueryType` enum. Query types not included here are filtered out. 
```

    - Default
*
    - openlineage-event-listener.transport
    - Type of transport to use when emitting lineage information. 
      See [](supported-transport-types) for list of available options with
      descriptions.
    - `CONSOLE`
*
    - openlineage-event-listener.trino.host
    - Trino hostname. Used to render Job Namespace in OpenLineage. Required.
    - None.
*
    - openlineage-event-listener.trino.port
    - Trino port. Used to render Job Namespace in OpenLineage. Required.
    - None.
*
    - openlineage-event-listener.trino.includeQueryTypes
    - Which types of queries should be taken into account when emitting lineage
      information. List of values split by comma. Each value must be
      matching `io.trino.spi.resourcegroups.QueryType` enum. Query types not
      included here are filtered out.
    - `DELETE,INSERT,MERGE,UPDATE,ALTER_TABLE_EXECUTE`
*
    - openlineage-event-listener.openlineage.disabledFacets
    - Which [](trino-facets) should be not included in final OpenLineage event. 
      Allowed values: `trino.metadata`, `trino.queryContext`, 
      `trino.queryStatistics`.
    - None.

:::

(supported-transport-types)=
### Supported Transport Types

> - `CONSOLE` - sends OpenLineage JSON event to Trino coordinator standard output.

Author: yes https://github.com/OpenLineage/OpenLineage/blob/main/client/java/src/main/java/io/openlineage/client/transports/ConsoleTransport.java

- `HTTP` - sends OpenLineage JSON event to OpenLineage compatible HTTP endpoint.

:::{list-table} OpenLineage `HTTP` Transport Configuration properties
:widths: 40, 40, 20
:header-rows: 1

*
    - Property name
    - Description
    - Default
*
    - openlineage-event-listener.openlineage.transport.url
    - URL of OpenLineage . Required if `HTTP` transport is configured.
    - None.
*
    - openlineage-event-listener.openlineage.transport.endpoint
    - Custom path for OpenLineage compatible endpoint. If configured, there
      cannot be any custom path within 
      `openlineage-event-listener.openlineage.transport.url`.

>     - `/api/v1`.

Author: these are separete openlineage http transport configuration options so I think it's better to configure them separately - otherwise i'd need to introduce code that splits this in some arbitrary way and passes relevant parts to HttpConfig instance

```
new HttpConfig(new URI(config.getUrl()), config.getEndpoint(), ...)
```
